Maya: Xgen (#4256)
ynput/OpenPype: website/docs/artist_hosts_maya_xgen.md

sidebar_label: Xgen
---

## Setup

### Settings

Go to project settings > Maya > enable "Open Workfile Post Initialization";

`project_settings/maya/open_workfile_post_initialization`

> This is due to two errors occurring when opening workfile contaiing referenced xgen nodes on launch of Maya;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is due to two errors occurring when opening workfile containing referenced xgen nodes on launch of Maya, specifically:
```

```
Importing XGen Collections...
# Error: XGen:  Failed to find description ball_xgenMain_01_:parent in collection ball_xgenMain_01_:collection. Abort applying delta: P:/PROJECTS/OP01_CG_demo/shots/sh040/work/Lighting/cg_sh040_Lighting_v001__ball_xgenMain_01___collection.xgen  #
# Error: XGen:  Tried to import a duplicate collection, ball_xgenMain_02_:collection, from file P:/PROJECTS/OP01_CG_demo/shots/sh040/work/Lighting/cg_sh040_Lighting_v001__ball_xgenMain_02___collection.xgen. Aborting import.  #
```
- ``Non-critical``: Errors on opening workfile and failed opening of published xgen. This is because Maya imports Xgen when referencing in external Maya files but the reference edits that ensure the location of the Xgen files are correct, has not been applied yet.
```
Importing XGen Collections...
# Error: XGen:  Failed to open file: P:/PROJECTS/OP01_CG_demo/shots/sh040/work/Lighting/cg_ball_xgenMain_v035__ball_rigMain_01___collection.xgen  #
# Error: XGen:  Failed to import collection from file P:/PROJECTS/OP01_CG_demo/shots/sh040/work/Lighting/cg_ball_xgenMain_v035__ball_rigMain_01___collection.xgen  #
```

### Workfile Incremental Save

> When you increment the Maya workfile to a new version, all `.xgen` and `.xgd` files referenced by the Xgen collection in the workspace is incremented as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you increment the Maya workfile to a new version, all `.xgen` and `.xgd` files referenced by the Xgen collection in the workspace are incremented as well.
```

Reviewer: Reading this sentence it leaves me wondering what does this means for my assets? Does it need to recache? Why does it need to increment along automatically?

Author: Yeah, I'm not sure this feature is actually needed in the end, or it needs to at least be configurable. There is no reason other than keeping the work files and area tidy.
The thinking was when publishing and the workfile gets incremented, we are still using the old versions xgen files so it would be hard (impossible?) to go back to an older workfile straight from the Workfile app.

The feature is actually also lacking because its only incrementing the `.xgen` and `.xgd` files, and not the side xgen folder structure containing `.ptx` and `.xuv`.

Question is whether this feature is worth finishing or abandon? @antirotor @mkolar @BigRoy

## Create

> Create an Xgen instance to publish. This needs to contain 1 Xgen collection only, but validation will check for this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an Xgen instance to publish. This needs to contain only **one Xgen collection**.
```

I feel there's no need to mention validation will check for it - we only need to explain what the user needs to do.

When loading an Xgen version the following happens:

- References in the Maya file.
- Copies the Xgen file (`.xgen`) to the current workspace.
- Modifies the Xgen file copy to load the current workspace first then the published Xgen collection.
- Makes a custom attribute on the Xgen collection, `float_ignore`, which can be seen under the `Expressions` tab of the `Xgen` UI. This is done to initialize the Xgen delta file workflow.
- Setup an Xgen delta file (`.xgd`) to store any workspace changes of the published Xgen version.

When the loading is done, Xgen collection will be in the Xgen delta file workflow which means any changes done in the Maya workfile will be stored in the current workspace. The published Xgen collection will remain intact, even if the user assigns maps to any attributes or otherwise modifies any attribute.

### Updating

When there are changes to the Xgen version, the user will be notified when opening the workfile or publishing. Since the Xgen is referenced, it follows the standard Maya referencing system and overrides.

> For example publishing `xgenMain` version 1 with the attribute `renderer` set to `None`, then version 2 has `renderer` set to `Arnold Renderer`. When updating from version 1 to 2, the `renderer` attribute will be updated to `Arnold Renderer` unless there is an override.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example publishing `xgenMain` version 1 with the attribute `renderer` set to `None`, then version 2 has `renderer` set to `Arnold Renderer`. When updating from version 1 to 2, the `renderer` attribute will be updated to `Arnold Renderer` unless there is a local override.
```

### Connect Patches

When loading in an Xgen version, it does not have any connections to anything in the workfile, so its static in the position it was published in. Use the [Connect Geometry](artist_hosts_maya#connect-geometry) action to connect Xgen to any matching loaded animated geometry.

### Connect Guides

Along with patches you can also connect the Xgen guides to an Alembic cache.

#### Usage

Select 1 animation container, of family `animation` or `pointcache`, then the Xgen containers to connect to. Right-click > `Actions` > `Connect Xgen`.

***Note: Only alembic (`.abc`) representations are allowed.***

#### Details

Connecting the guide will make Xgen use the Alembic directly, setting the attributes under `Guide Animation`, so the Alembic needs to contain the same amount of curves as guides in the Xgen.

The animation container gets connected with the Xgen container, so if the animation container is updated so will the Xgen container's attribute.

## Rendering

To render with Xgen, follow the [Rendering With OpenPype](artist_hosts_maya#rendering-with-openpype) guide.

### Details

> When submitting a workfile with Xgen, all Xgen related files will be collected and published as the workfiles resources. This means the published workfile is no longer referencing the workspace Xgen files.

Reviewer: Is this always true? or only when use published file for rendering is enabled in the openpype settings?

Author: Hmm, this happens when there is an active renderlayer present in the context, but dont think it'll check for whether the rendering process is using the published file or not. Will investigate.

Author: Will account for not using the published file now.

sidebar_label: Xgen
---

## Working with Xgen in OpenPype
## Setup

OpenPype support publishing and loading of Xgen interactive grooms. You can publish 
them as mayaAscii files with scalps that can be loaded into another maya scene, or as

> alembic caches. 

Reviewer: The new documentation gets technical rather quickly - should we maybe, like before have a few lines of 'introduction' of _what_ the Xgen functionality in OpenPype is intended to do. Not something long, but at least an artist looking at "hey what's supported" could find it in a quick read instead of first having to read about how they need to customize project settings.

Author: Sure, will add a little intro.
